documentation draft (#455)
filecoin-project/cpp-filecoin: README.md

# Filecoin (cpp-filecoin)

> C++17 implementation of blockchain based digital storage

Filecoin is a decentralized protocol described in [spec](https://filecoin-project.github.io/specs/)

## Minimal hardware requirements
### Node minimal parameters:
**Hard disk space**: at least 200 GB  
**RAM**: 8 GB  
**OS**: Linux(Ubuntu), MacOS. Other operating systems builds are not supported yet, so running on them may be unstable.

> ### Miner minimal parameters:

Reviewer: add link to docs.filecoin.com

Author: done

# Filecoin (cpp-filecoin)

> C++17 implementation of blockchain based digital storage

Filecoin is a decentralized protocol described in [spec](https://filecoin-project.github.io/specs/)

## Minimal hardware requirements
### Node minimal parameters:
**Hard disk space**: at least 200 GB  
**RAM**: 8 GB  

> **OS**: Linux(Ubuntu), MacOS, other operating systems builds are not tested yet, so running on them may be unstable

Reviewer 2: Other OS are not supported, some functions are not implemented for them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**OS**: Linux(Ubuntu), MacOS, other operating systems builds are not tested yet, so running on them may be unstable.
```

Author: fixed

Otherwise, CMake would not be able to compile Rust-related targets and will produce a warning about that during configuration.

### CodeStyle

We follow [CppCoreGuidelines](https://github.com/isocpp/CppCoreGuidelines).

Please use clang-format 11.0.0 with provided [.clang-format](.clang-format) file to autoformat the code.

## Maintenance

Maintainers: @zuiris, @turuslan, @Elestrias, @ortyomka, @wer1st, @Alexey-N-Chernyshov

Tickets: Can be opened in GitHub Issues.

# Cpp-Filecoin install and setup guide
## Fuhon node establishing

> There are 2 ways of getting executable version of filecoin node and miner. The First is to get executables by [downloading](https://github.com/filecoin-project/cpp-filecoin/releases "cpp-filecoin releases").The second is to build executables by yourself, see **Advanced building**. To begin running a node you will need `node` executable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are 2 ways of getting executable version of filecoin node and miner. The First is to get executables by [downloading](https://github.com/filecoin-project/cpp-filecoin/releases "cpp-filecoin releases"). The second is to build executables by yourself, see **Advanced building**. To begin running a node you will need `node` executable.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are 2 ways of getting executable version of filecoin node and miner. The First is to get executables by [downloading](https://github.com/filecoin-project/cpp-filecoin/releases "cpp-filecoin releases").The second is to build executables by yourself, see **Advanced building**. To run the node you need `node` executable.
```

More about snapshot management [here](https://docs.filecoin.io/get-started/lotus/chain/#restoring-a-custom-snapshot "snapshot documentation").
2. After all the preparations you can launch a node:
*  link working directory, which will be a storage for all node-associated files. It can be done with `--repo` flag
*  One more important linking is configuration and genesis files, you can pass paths to them with `--config CONFIG_FILE` and `--genesis GENESIS_FILE` respectively.
*  For specifying peers listening port you need to pass `--port PORT` flag
*  In case you want to specify api port for a node + miner configuration or multi-node configuration,  you can do that with `--api API_PORT`
*  Example of the command: `node_exec --repo path_to_node_repo --genesis genesis.car --config config.cfg  --port 8080 --api 1235`

## Lotus-CLI establishing
### User approach:
1. Download [lotus executable](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/releases/ "lotus releases")

> 2. You can use CLI client with your node by linking it with `--repo <path to your node working directory>` flag,
>    more of lotus-CLI flags will be covered in **Work with Lotus-CLI**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. You can use CLI client with your node by linking it with `--repo <path to your node working directory>` flag, more of lotus-CLI flags will be covered in **Work with Lotus-CLI**
```

   - build lotus-seed with `$make lotus-seed` or `make debug` - for debug version initiation,
     or `make 2k` for version with 2 KiB sector size  or `make interopnet` for interopnet version.

   - Generate genesis and preseal. Ensure lotus-seed was build in previous step and run script node `$genesis.js DIR 1` to generate genesis. `DIR` - directory where genesis and presealed sectors will be generated, 1 - number of sectors for miner. In case your lotus executables lay in custom directory or script can not find them, you can link lotus target with `LOTUS=/<path to your lotus executable>/lotus node genesis.js <directory where results wil be> <sealing sectors upper bound>`

2. Run your node-1 with new genesis file as it was done in chapter **Fuhon node establishing**

3. Run your node-2 as the 1st one, but be sure to open api port on it with `--api API_PORT`

4. Connect node-2 to node-1 by commands:
   `addr=$(lotus --repo REPO1 net listen | grep 127.0.0.1)`
   `lotus --repo REPO2 net connect $addr`t

5. After generating new genesis file, you will also receive genesis.json with declared miners list, these are addresses of the initial miners.

> 6. To start miner that is declared in genesisfile (step 5) you can use chapter **Fuhon miner establishing** but with some major changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. To start miner that is declared in genesis file (step 5) you can use chapter **Fuhon miner establishing** but with some major changes.
```

Otherwise, CMake would not be able to compile Rust-related targets and will produce a warning about that during configuration.

### CodeStyle

We follow [CppCoreGuidelines](https://github.com/isocpp/CppCoreGuidelines).

Please use clang-format 11.0.0 with provided [.clang-format](.clang-format) file to autoformat the code.

## Maintenance

Maintainers: @zuiris, @turuslan, @Elestrias, @ortyomka, @wer1st, @Alexey-N-Chernyshov

Tickets: Can be opened in Github Issues.

# Cpp-Filecoin install and setup guide
## Fuhon node establishing

> There is 2 ways of getting executable version of filecoin node and miner. The First is to get executables by downloading, you can do it here: `https://link-tofiles`.The second is to build executables by yourself, see **Advanced building**. To begin running a node you will need `node.exe`

Reviewer: maybe comment this section until link is available

Reviewer 2: `.exe` extension is too windows-specific, use executable.

Author: fixed

Reviewer: link is still missing

Author: no release -> no link

1. To configure node you also need to make:
* **configuration file**
  examle `config.cfg`:

     ```

>      bootstrap= <enter your peer here>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     bootstrap=<enter your peer here>
```

Author: fixed

     drand-server=api.drand.sh
     drand-pubkey=868f005eb8e6e4ca0a47c8a77ceaa5309a47978a7c71bc5cce96366b5d7a569937c529eeda66c7293784a9402801af31
     drand-genesis-time=1595431050
     drand-period=30
     ```
* **genesisfile** - this is a special pre-set file with the initial block, which will configure the initial state of your node, set network parameters like sector size, recall time, e.t.c and define miner-list with first network miner.

>   you also can download that [snapshots](https://fil-chain-snapshots-fallback.s3.amazonaws.com/mainnet/minimal_finality_stateroots_latest.car "snapshote store") for a less time-assuming connection and syncronysation to the popular filecoin networks.

Reviewer: Add link to [docs](https://docs.filecoin.io/get-started/lotus/chain)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you also can download that [snapshots](https://fil-chain-snapshots-fallback.s3.amazonaws.com/mainnet/minimal_finality_stateroots_latest.car "snapshote store") for a less time-assuming connection and syncronysation to the popular filecoin networks.
```

Author: removed

2. After all the preparations you can launch a node:

> * to start exe`$~/.../<path_to_node.exe>`

Reviewer 2: `.exe` was discussed.

Author: fixed

*  also you need to link working directory, which will be a storage for all node associated files. It can be done with `--repo` flag
*  One more important linking is configuration and genesis files, you can pass paths to them with `--config <path>` and `--genesis <path>` respectively.
*  For specifing peers listening port you need to pass `--port <port>` flag

> *  In case you want to make a node + miner configuration or multi-node configuration, you need to open api-port. You can do that with `--api <port>`

Reviewer: api port is open by default, maybe you mean "specify/configure port".

Author: yes, I have changed it

> *  Example of the comand: `$~/.../<path_to_node.exe> --repo REPO --genesis genesis.car --config config.cfg --port 8080 -- api 1235`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*  Example of the comand: `$~/.../<path_to_node.exe> --repo REPO --genesis genesis.car --config config.cfg --port 8080 --api 1235`
```

2. You can use CLI client with your node by linking it with `--repo <path to your node working directory>` flag,
   more of lotus-CLI flags will be covered in **Work with Lotus-CLI**

### Advananced approach:
1. clone [lotus repository](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus "lotus project")
2. build lotus cli client with command: `make build`
3. In case you want connect to interopnet, build lotus with `make interopnet`
## Work with Lotus-CLI

1. For proper miner work you will need a bls wallet, which can be made with lotus-cli by using the following command: `$lotus --repo <repo of your working node> wallet new bls`, after the execution of this comand you will revcieve the public address of your new account, and a private key in `<repo of youe working node>/keystore`.
2. Also you may need to put some Filecoins on your account from other addresses you may have, and you can do it  with `lotus --repo <repo of your working node> send --from <sender address> <public address of your account>`

3. If you dont have any Filecoins or you want to get more, you can buy them on stocks with usage of you public address.

> 4. Other advanced commands you may find in [filecoin-docs about lotus CLI](https://docs.filecoin.io/mine/lotus/dagstore/#cli-commands "lotus CLI documentation").

Reviewer: wrong link.
lotus executables have help command.

Author: fixed

## Fuhon miner establishing

> To start mining at first you need to configure and run Fuhon, Lotus, Venus or any other filecoin node. Before all make sure that your node had successfully **connected** and updated to the current **block height** (actual network block number). Also, your node's api port should be opened for conection.

Reviewer: "Venus or any other filecoin node" is misleading.
this doc describes fuhon-miner and lotus-miner, which relies on lotus compatible rpc.

Author: fixed

To provide wallet functions and oracle information be sure to run lotus-cli at first. You can find how to do it in **Lotus-CLI establishing**.

Once all the needed  modules will be started, you can continue with miner configuration.

1. Create miner work directory (f.e. `$mkdir miner`)

> 2. Download miner executable here : `https:\\link_to_download` and put it in work directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Download miner executable here : `https://link_to_download` and put it in work directory
```

> 3. Download proof parameters `https:\\` and clone it in miner directory or if you have copy of the cpp-filecoin project, just copy proof parameters with command: `p /<path to cpp-filecoin>/core/proofs/parameters.json <your miner working directory>/proof-params.json`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Copy proof parameters json file with command: `cp <path to cpp-filecoin>/core/proofs/parameters.json <your miner working directory>/proof-params.json`
```

Author: fixed

> 4. Run yor miner with ` --repo <node working directory> --miner-repo <miner work directory> --owner <your public address> --miner-api <node api open port> --sector-size <sector size>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Run yor miner with ` --repo <node working directory> --miner-repo <miner work directory> --owner <your public address> --miner-api <miner api port> --sector-size <sector size>`
```

another parameters can be specified to reuse existing miner actor.

Author: fixed

Reviewer: MINER_API_PORT (not same as node API_PORT).

Author: done

## Advanced Building
This aproach allows to build our project with your modifications,
but be sure that your realisation follows consensus rules.

1. clone [funon-filecoin project](https://github.com/filecoin-project/cpp-filecoin "cpp-filecoin project")

2. go to `./cpp-filecoin` directory

3. run `$git submodule --recursive --update`

4. build targets: node - for node executable, miner_main- for miner executable.

> 5. First build will likely take long time. However, you can cache binaries to [hunter-binary-cache]. It is suggested to build project with clang-tidy checks, however if you wish to omit clang-tidy step, you can use `cmake ..` instead.

Reviewer: hunter and clang-tidy are not related, split

- Tests can be run with:
  ```
  cd build
  ctest
  ```

> 6. node executable can be found at: `./<build_repository>/core/node/main`.
> 7. miner executable can be found at:
>    `./<build_repository>/core/miner/main`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. node executable can be found at: `<build_directory>/core/node/main`.
7. miner executable can be found at:
   `<build_directory>/core/miner/main`
```

Author: fixed

8. next steps are similar to common miner and node establishing which can be found at **Fuhon node establishing** and **Fuhon miner establishing**

> 9. To finish your building you may also want to add your github token, In such case you need to set up two environment variables:

Reviewer: hunter token should be set **before** build

```
GITHUB_HUNTER_USERNAME=<github account name>
GITHUB_HUNTER_TOKEN=<github token>
```
To generate github token follow the [instructions](https://help.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/creating-a-personal-access-token-for-the-command-line). Make sure `read:packages` and `write:packages` permissions are granted.

## Configuration Lotus-Fuhon
### Lotus-node and Fuhon-miner
1. To start up a lotus node at first you need to get [lotus executable](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/releases/ "lotus releases")

> 2. You can run your lotus node with the next command: `$lotus --repo <node working directory> daemon --genesis genesis.car --import-key PRESEAL/pre-seal-MINER.key --profile bootstrapper`, more about running lotus software can be found in [filecoin-docs](https://docs.filecoin.io/get-started/lotus/installation "lotus filecoin documentation").

Reviewer: "preseal" is only applicable to local devnet, not mainnet/interopnet

Author: fixed

### Fuhon-node and Lotus-miner
1. Establishing of a Fuhon node is described in **Fuhon miner establishing**
2. Lotus miner can be established by the following way:
    - to begin with you need you own bls wallet(described in **Working with Lotus-CLI**)

>     - run your miner with command: `lotus-miner --repo <your node running directory> --miner-repo <minner future working directory> init --nosync --owner <your bls wallet public address> --sector-size <Size of sectors that will be sealed>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - init your miner with command: `lotus-miner --repo <your node running directory> --miner-repo <minner future working directory> init --nosync --owner <your bls wallet public address> --sector-size <Size of sectors that will be sealed>`
```

Author: fixed

    - to know more about lotus software establishing, read [filecoin-docs](https://docs.filecoin.io/get-started/lotus/installation/#minimal-requirements "lotus establishing guide")

## Docker configuration
    Will be soon!

## Your new Filecoin network start

> To run a new filecoin network, you should run at least two nodes, that will have comunication with each other and a miner (miners are representation of the network power, so more miners connected and sealed, more power your network will have).

Reviewer: network may have single node, but requires at least one genesis miner (to generate blocks)

1. To run the first node you will need to generate a new genesis file which will be an initial instruction for all new conected nodes.
   This can be done with lotus-seed tools:
    - Clone  [lotus repository](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus "lotus project")

>     - build lotus-seed with `$make lotus-seed`

Reviewer: mention `make debug`, `make 2k`, `make interopnet`

Author: done

>     - Generate genesis and preseal. Ensure lotus-seed was build in previous step and run script node `$genesis.js DIR 1` to generate genesis. `DIR` - directory where genesis and presealed sectors will be generated, 1 - number of sectors for miner. In case your lotus executables lay in custom directory or sript can not find them, you can link lotus target with `LOTUS=/<path to your lotus executable>/lotus node genesis.js <directory where results wil be> <sealing sectors upper bound>`

Reviewer: there is no genesis.js. can write bash commands here.

is this section required? will it help users? is it sufficient?

Author: this section will help users to establish their network, without genesis it can be done with genesis of other networks, which make new network predictable at the initial state

1. To configure node you also need to make:
* **configuration file**
  example `config.cfg`:

     ```
     bootstrap=<enter your peer here>
     drand-server=api.drand.sh
     drand-pubkey=868f005eb8e6e4ca0a47c8a77ceaa5309a47978a7c71bc5cce96366b5d7a569937c529eeda66c7293784a9402801af31
     drand-genesis-time=1595431050
     drand-period=30
     ```
* **genesisfile** - this is a special pre-set file with the initial block, which will configure the initial state of your node, set network parameters like sector size, recall time, e.t.c and define miner-list with first network miner.

you also can download that [snapshots](https://fil-chain-snapshots-fallback.s3.amazonaws.com/mainnet/minimal_finality_stateroots_latest.car "snapshote store") for a less time-assuming connection and synchronisation to the popular filecoin networks.
More about snapshot management [here](https://docs.filecoin.io/get-started/lotus/chain/#restoring-a-custom-snapshot "snapshot documentation").
2. After all the preparations you can launch a node:

> * to start executable`$~/.../PATH_TO_EXECUTABLE`

Reviewer: please simplify.  
`$~/.../PATH_TO_EXECUTABLE` complexity looks scary and reminds of windows variable expansion

Author: I have used it to make guide clearer in understanding, I also believe that <node working dir> is clearer than REPO, this touches all the places of command usage examples

Author: *that node working dir is clearer

*  also, you need to link working directory, which will be a storage for all node-associated files. It can be done with `--repo` flag

> *  One more important linking is configuration and genesis files, you can pass paths to them with `--config "CONFIG_FILE"` and `--genesis "GENESIS_FILE"` respectively.

Reviewer: quotes (`"`) in `--config "CONFIG_FILE"` are misleading, because they have meaning in shell commands.

my previous comment was ambigous, because i wrote "CONFIG_FILE" instead of `CONFIG_FILE`.

Author: CONFIG_FILE is already a part of a command layout, so it can't lay in a  unique layer

*  For specifying peers listening port you need to pass `--port "PORT"` flag
*  In case you want to specify api port for a node + miner configuration or multi-node configuration,  you can do that with `--api "API_PORT"`
*  Example of the command: `$~/.../node_exec --repo ~/.../node_repo --genesis genesis.car --config config.cfg  --port 8080 --api 1235`

3. Once the node has been successfully configured, it will start to connect to network peers and download blockchain history. This process may continue for a while(f.e. the weight of chain of an enteropnet network is 3.5 GB). As it takes a while, you can change cids_index.car file to downloaded snapshot(see step 1 for that).

## Lotus-CLI establishing
### User approach:

> 1. Download [lotus-CLI executable](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/releases/ "lotus releases")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Download [`lotus` executable](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus/releases/ "lotus releases")
```

Author: changed

2. Download miner executable here : `https://link_to_download` and put it in work directory
3.Copy proof parameters json file with command: `cp /<path to cpp-filecoin>/core/proofs/parameters.json <your MINER_REPO/proof-params.json`
4. Run yor miner with ` --repo "REPO" --miner-repo "MINER_REPO" --owner "PUBLIC_ADRESS" --miner-api "API_PORT" --sector-size "SECTOR_SIZE"`

## Advanced Building
This approach allows to build our project with your modifications,
but be sure that your realisation follows consensus rules.

1. clone [funon-filecoin project](https://github.com/filecoin-project/cpp-filecoin "cpp-filecoin project")

2. go to `./cpp-filecoin` directory

3. run `$git submodule --recursive --update`

4. To finish your building you may also want to add your github token, In such case you need to set up two environment variables:
```
GITHUB_HUNTER_USERNAME=<github account name>
GITHUB_HUNTER_TOKEN=<github token>
```
To generate github token follow the [instructions](https://help.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/creating-a-personal-access-token-for-the-command-line). Make sure `read:packages` and `write:packages` permissions are granted.

> 5. build targets: node - for node executable, miner_main- for miner executable.

Reviewer: `cmake --build BUILD_DIR --target node miner_main`

Author: done

6. First build will likely take long time. However, you can cache binaries to [hunter-binary-cache]. 
   

> 7. It is suggested to build project with clang-tidy checks, however if you wish to omit clang-tidy step, you can use `cmake ..` instead.

Reviewer: this step is run from BUILD_DIR=./build, but mkdir&cd step was erased

Author: what do you mean ?

Reviewer: `..` in `cmake ..` means parent of `./build` directory, which was created by `mkdir build && cd build` command, but that command was erased by pr

Author: changed

   This can be done with lotus-seed tools:
    - Clone  [lotus repository](https://github.com/filecoin-project/lotus "lotus project")

    - build lotus-seed with `$make lotus-seed` or `make debug` - for debug version initiation,
      or `make 2k` for version with 2KiB sector size  or `make interopnet` for interopnet version.

    - Generate genesis and preseal. Ensure lotus-seed was build in previous step and run script node `$genesis.js DIR 1` to generate genesis. `DIR` - directory where genesis and presealed sectors will be generated, 1 - number of sectors for miner. In case your lotus executables lay in custom directory or sript can not find them, you can link lotus target with `LOTUS=/<path to your lotus executable>/lotus node genesis.js <directory where results wil be> <sealing sectors upper bound>`

2. Run your node-1 with new genesis file as it was done in chapter **Fuhon node establishing**

3. Run your node-2 as the 1st one, but be sure to open api port on it with `--api <api port>`

4. Connect node-2 to node-1 by commands:
   `addr=$(node --repo "REPO1" net listen | grep 127.0.0.1)`

>    `$node --repo "REPO2" net connect $addr`t 

Reviewer: "node" is not cli

Author: what do you  mean ?

Reviewer: `... net listen` and `... net connect` are `lotus` exe cli subcommands, not `node` exe

Author: this is taken from Alexeys guide, should I change it to addr=$(lotus --repo REPO1 net listen | grep 127.0.0.1)`
   `lotus --repo REPO2 net connect $addr`t  ?

5. After generating new genesis file, you will also receive genesis.json with declared miners list, these are addresses of the initial miners.

> 6. To start miner that is declared in genesisfile (step 5) you can use chapter **Fuhon miner establishing** but instead of owner address pass declared in the genesis one.

Reviewer: `lotus-miner` flags are different for genesis miner

Author: also don't understand

Reviewer: genesis miner requires `--genesis-miner --actor ACTOR --pre-sealed-sectors PRESEAL_DIR --pre-sealed-metadata PRESEAL_JSON` flags

Author: done

3.Copy proof parameters json file with command: `cp /<path to cpp-filecoin>/core/proofs/parameters.json MINER_REPO/proof-params.json`
4. Run yor miner with ` --repo REPO --miner-repo MINER_REPO --owner PUBLIC_ADRESS --miner-api API_PORT --sector-size SECTOR_SIZE`

## Advanced Building
This approach allows to build our project with your modifications,
but be sure that your realisation follows consensus rules.

1. clone [funon-filecoin project](https://github.com/filecoin-project/cpp-filecoin "cpp-filecoin project")

2. go to `./cpp-filecoin` directory

3. run `$git submodule --recursive --update`

4. To finish your building you may also want to add your github token, In such case you need to set up two environment variables:
```
GITHUB_HUNTER_USERNAME=<github account name>
GITHUB_HUNTER_TOKEN=<github token>
```
To generate github token follow the [instructions](https://help.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/creating-a-personal-access-token-for-the-command-line). Make sure `read:packages` and `write:packages` permissions are granted.

5. At this stage you will need a build directory, which can be created with `mkdir BUILD_REPO` 

> 5. build targets: node - for node executable, miner_main- for miner executable. 

Reviewer: duplicate `5`.

cmake generation step missing (eg `cmake . -B BUILD_DIR`).

This approach allows to build our project with your modifications,
but be sure that your realisation follows consensus rules.

1. clone [funon-filecoin project](https://github.com/filecoin-project/cpp-filecoin "cpp-filecoin project")

2. go to `./cpp-filecoin` directory

3. run `$git submodule --recursive --update`

4. To finish your building you may also want to add your GitHub token, In such case you need to set up two environment variables:
```
GITHUB_HUNTER_USERNAME=<github account name>
GITHUB_HUNTER_TOKEN=<github token>
```
To generate GitHub token follow the [instructions](https://help.github.com/en/github/authenticating-to-github/creating-a-personal-access-token-for-the-command-line). Make sure `read:packages` and `write:packages` permissions are granted.

5. At this stage you will need a build directory, which can be created with `mkdir BUILD_REPO`
   
6. Build cmake with the following command: `cmake . -B BUILD_DIR`

7. build targets: node - for node executable, miner_main- for miner executable.
   example: `cmake --build BUILD_DIR --target node miner_main`

8. First build will likely take long time. However, you can cache binaries to [hunter-binary-cache].

> 9. It is also suggested to build project with clang-tidy checks, however if you wish to omit clang-tidy step, you can use `cmake ..` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
may add `cmake . -B BUILD_DIR -D CLANG_TIDY=ON` example to step 6, if needed (does it even build with that flag?)
